JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We are in the middle of
a crisis on
our southern border.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
takes on a
big election promise, ordering a
border wall
be built and cracking down on
illegal immigration.
Then: getting to the bottom of
Mr. Trump's
vow to investigate
unsubstantiated claims
that millions voted illegally in
the general
election.
Plus: Federal agencies ordered
by the Trump
administration to restrict their
communications
raises concerns about the
government holding
back information from the
public.
And after years of stigma, why
researchers
are turning back to psychedelic
drugs as a
way to treat severe PTSD and
other mental
illnesses.
STEPHEN ROSS, NYU Langone
Medical Center:
Psychiatrists are really
yearning to have
something that works
differently, that works
quickly, that lasts longer to
add to their
toolbox.
It's really important to do
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Day three of this
first White
House workweek, and the focus
today turned
to the southern border.
President Trump moved to make
good on long-promised
action to stop illegal
crossings.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We have been talking
about this right
from the beginning.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Department of
Homeland
Security was the backdrop for
getting tough
on immigration.
The president signed two
executive orders,
one to start work on completing
a wall along
the Mexican border.
DONALD TRUMP: You folks know how
badly needed
it is as a help, but very badly
need.
This will also help Mexico by
deterring illegal
immigration from Central America
and by disrupting
violent cartel networks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The wall was a
signature promise
from the campaign, and so was
his insistence
about who will foot the bill.
DONALD TRUMP: Who's going to pay
for the wall?
AUDIENCE: Mexico!
DONALD TRUMP: Not even a doubt.
OK?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Today, before
signing off on
the wall, Mr. Trump told ABC
News that while
construction could begin within
months, Mexico
will not be paying up front.
DONALD TRUMP: And we will be, in
a form, reimbursed
by Mexico, which I have always
said.
QUESTION: So they will pay us
back?
DONALD TRUMP: Yes, absolutely,
100 percent.
QUESTION: So the American
taxpayer will pay
for the wall at first?
DONALD TRUMP: All it is, is, we
will be reimbursed
at a later date from whatever
transaction
we make from Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, at the
announcement, the
president said construction
would start immediately.
Mexico's President Enrique Pena
Nieto has
insisted his government will not
pay for a
wall, but he is due to visit
Washington next
week, and Mr. Trump said today
he is optimistic
about that meeting.
DONALD TRUMP: By working
together on a positive
trend, safe borders, and
economic cooperation,
I truly believe we can enhance
the relation
between our two nations, to a
degree not seen
before, certainly, in a very,
very long time.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
also acted today
to boost the number of Border
Patrol and immigration
agents, and strip federal
funding from so-called
sanctuary cities that shield
undocumented
immigrants from arrest or
detention.
In addition, he moved to end the
practice
of taking undocumented
immigrants into custody,
but then releasing them with
orders to report
in later.
Beyond immigration, the
president was busy
today on other matters.
With a series of tweets, he said
he will announce
his nominee for the U.S. Supreme
Court vacancy
on February 2, he promised to
order an investigation
into alleged voter fraud, and he
threatened
to send in federal authorities
to curb Chicago's
record surge of gun violence.
In response, Chicago's Mayor
Rahm Emanuel
said today he would welcome
federal help.
RAHM EMANUEL (D), Mayor of
Chicago: Chicago,
like other cities right now that
are dealing
with gun violence, wants the
partnership with
federal law enforcement, at
least in a more
significant way than we're
having it today,
whether that's the FBI, the DEA,
the Drug
Enforcement Agency, and the ATF.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow, the
president heads
to Philadelphia to address the
congressional
Republican retreat.
The White House indicates he
will also announce
steps in coming days to restrict
refugees
entering the U.S.
A senior Mexican official now
says that President
Pena Nieto is considering
canceling his trip
to Washington because of the
order to start
work on the border wall.
We will focus in detail on Mr.
Trump's immigration
orders and on his call for
investigating voter
fraud after the news summary.
In the day's other news: The
White House distanced
itself from news reports that it
may order
a major review of handling
terror suspects.
The reports said that a draft
executive order
could allow for renewed use of
banned interrogation
methods, and for reopening
so-called black
site prisons outside the U.S.
Presidential spokesman Sean
Spicer said it
wasn't a White House document,
but he declined
to say more.
A big day on Wall Street, as the
Dow Jones
industrial average, for the
first time, broke
the 20000 barrier.
The Dow gained 155 points, to
close at 20068.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 55
points, and the
S&P 500 added 18.
Stocks surged from the start, as
strong earnings
and President Trump's promise of
deregulation
and tax cuts sparked the rally.
MARIA FIORINI RAMIREZ, MFR
Securities: Companies
may have less cost related to
whether it's
compliance or regulation, and
that frees quite
a bit of the earnings at the
bottom line,
and they can use some of that to
reinvest,
and invest in capital, and
spread it to dividends
going to shareholders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The broader
market is also
passing milestones.
Both the S&P and the Nasdaq have
had a series
of record closes lately.
In Somalia, Islamist fighters
attacked a hotel
that's popular with the
country's lawmakers.
The government said at least 11
people were
killed.
The city's ambulance director
said 28 died.
It happened in the capital,
Mogadishu.
The extremist Al-Shabaab group
claimed responsibility.
Four attackers rammed a car bomb
into the
hotel's gates, and then stormed
the compound.
Police eventually ended the
siege, killing
all of the militants.
Hope dimmed today in Italy in
the search for
survivors of an avalanche last
week.
Officials confirmed 25 dead, as
rescue workers
pulled out more bodies.
But crews continued digging
through the snow,
looking for the four people who
are still
missing.
Meanwhile, Italy's prime
minister admitted
to parliament that there were
delays in the
response.
PAOLO GENTILONI, Italian Prime
Minister (through
translator): If there are
responsibilities
for the tragedy, the
investigations will clear
this up.
The government certainly doesn't
fear the
truth, but the truth helps us do
better, not
to poison the debate.
It is in our hands to make sure
that once
the disaster has past, further
injustice is
not created.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the prime
minister spoke,
residents of quake-struck areas
marched towards
Italy's parliament, protesting
the handling
of the crisis.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
full analysis
of the Trump administration's
latest moves,
including efforts to build a
wall on the Mexico
border; the unsubstantiated
claim that three
million people voted illegally;
an alleged
crackdown on federal agencies'
communication
with the public; remembering
Mary Tyler Moore;
and much more.
We take a deeper look now at
President Trump's
executive actions on immigration
and border
security with Marielena
Hincapie, the executive
director of the National
Immigration Law Center.
It's an immigrant rights group.
And Jessica Vaughan, she's from
the Center
for Immigration Studies, which
advocates for
tougher border security.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
Marielena, I'm going to start
with you.
Overall reaction to what the
president had
to say today?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE, Executive
Director, National
Immigration Law Center: Well,
Judy, we are
-- we find this announcement
today as an extremist
policy.
I think President Trump's
campaign rhetoric
that was anti-immigrant,
xenophobic, anti-refugee,
anti-Muslim today is becoming a
harsh reality.
And it's sending a message of
great fear to
immigrant communities across the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jessica Vaughan,
reaction to
what he had to say overall?
JESSICA VAUGHAN, Center for
Immigration Studies:
This is a very impressive set of
actions.
He really went big.
But that is what was needed to
restore integrity
to our immigration system, and
to not only
secure the border, but also
restart interior
enforcement, which has collapsed
in the last
few years, and shine that not
only do we need
border security, but it has to
be backed up
by policies that make sure that
people cannot
game our system.
You know, the end to the catch
and release
system that's been in place for
the last few
years is going to make a big
difference in
deterring future illegal
immigration.
And that's important.
We needed to start sending that
message to
people that they aren't going to
be able to
get away with just getting to
the United States,
getting in, and then being
home-free from
enforcement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me pick
up on that
and ask Marielena Hincapie about
that.
What about -- the president
said, we're going
to stop the so-called catch and
release, where
they were stopping people,
arresting them,
but then letting them go and
said come back
for a certain court date.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Right.
And the reason that people are
being allowed
to go before an immigration
judge is because
many of the people, particularly
from Central
America in the recent, last
couple of years
were people that actually, once
they went
before an immigration judge,
were able to
show that they had a credible
fear and that
they were eligible for asylum.
This is a country where we
believe that every
single person should have their
fair day in
court.
That is no different in our
immigration system.
The problem is, we have a very
dysfunctional
immigration system, very few
immigration judges.
And, in fact, one of the things
that President
Trump has done, not today, but
in some of
his previous announcements, has
been to freeze
all federal hires.
And that includes immigration
judges.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Jessica
Vaughan, if it
is a system that could have been
working if
there were enough people, enough
federal employees
to make it work, why then
dismantle it and
go back and say we won't release
you anymore?
JESSICA VAUGHAN: Well, the
system has been
exploited and too many cases
dumped on the
immigration courts that should
never have
been there.
There are other forms of due
process that
ICE could have been using and
the Border Patrol
could have been using all these
years that
would have been resolved much
more quickly
and used less resources, and
brought about
a quicker resolution to the case
for the illegal
immigrant.
But what's going to happen now
is, they're
going to put resources at the
border, so that
the Border Patrol can resolve
these cases.
There will be asylum officers
and immigration
judges there, so that any
applications for
asylum can be dealt with very
quickly.
And what we won't see is tens of
thousands
of people admitted into the
country who then
skip out on their immigration
hearings or
are not successful in getting
asylum, but
then just disappear into the
woodwork and
ICE is told not to go looking
for them.
That is what makes our system so
dysfunctional
now, and that's what is going to
change under
these actions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marielena
Hincapie, one of
the things the president
announced was hiring
more Border Patrol agents,
hiring more immigration
officials.
Why isn't that a good thing in
order to enforce
the law?
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: We actually
already have
a lot of both Border Patrol
agents and immigration
agents.
What is happening, Judy, is,
one, is a lot
of what was announced today,
particularly
with respect to the wall,
particularly with
respect to the number of Border
Patrol and
immigration agents, frankly, is
political
theatrics.
None of that is going to go into
effect without
congressional appropriations,
without more
money, more federal spending.
And, in fact, it is us as
taxpayers that will
pay for all of that.
Part of what was really
troubling about today's
announcements is, as Jessica
mentioned, it's
not just at the border, but in
the interior,
the orders begin, the executive
order today
begins by saying that every
individual, right
-- we're talking about the 11
million undocumented
immigrants -- are considered a
national security
threat, a public safety threat.
That includes people who are
taking care of
our children.
It includes people who are
picking our fruits
and vegetables.
It includes people who are
serving us at restaurants.
Those are not individuals who
are, in fact,
national security threats.
They are our neighbors.
They are part of our families.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask you
both about
the wall.
But, before I do that, let me
ask you, Jessica
Vaughan, about this notion.
Did the president send a signal
today that
every one of these, whether it's
11 million
or 12 million undocumented
immigrants in this
country, are a threat?
JESSICA VAUGHAN: No, I don't
think that's
what is being said at all.
Under the law, of course, anyone
who is here
illegally is potentially subject
to deportation.
But these orders focus very
clearly on deterring
illegal immigration, dealing
very quickly
with people who cross the border
illegally,
and enforcing the law in the
interior of the
country, with criminal aliens
being the top
priority.
So, that is appropriate.
That's smart enforcement.
That's what has been missing for
the last
eight years.
And, yes, enforcement costs
money, but illegal
immigration and tolerating
illegal immigration
costs much more.
The National Academy of Science
has found
that it's something like $50
billion a year
that goes to services to illegal
alien-headed
households.
And it's about time that we get
back on track
and start enforcing the law
again.
That's what the public expects.
That's why they voted for Donald
Trump in
part.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You want to
respond quickly
to that, and then we're going to
ask about...
(CROSSTALK)
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Yes.
So, actually, that's not what
has been missing,
Judy.
Under President Obama, he was in
fact focusing
on people with criminal
convictions.
What is different here is, in
addition to
focusing on individuals with
criminal convictions,
this executive order actually
says that individuals
who have been charged with a
crime, even if
they haven't been convicted,
even someone
who may have done something that
is considered
to be a crime would be
priorities for enforcement.
Again, that is deeply troubling
in a country
when we believe that people are
innocent until
proven guilty.
Due process is critical to both
our criminal
justice system, as well as our
immigration.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jessica Vaughan,
only a minute
left.
On the wall, the president said
throughout
the campaign this was something
going to be
paid for by Mexico.
Today, though, he said, at least
initially,
the taxpayers will pay for it.
Did you want him to go farther
than that?
Is this what you expected?
JESSICA VAUGHAN: This is pretty
much what
I expected.
It will take time to raise the
revenue from
other sources, whether it's
Mexico or illegal
aliens or, you know, through
remittances or
withheld tax refunds or visa
fees or what
have you.
There are lots of different ways
to raise
that revenue.
But I think Congress is very
willing and the
public is very willing to put
taxpayer funds
up front to get this enforcement
going right
away and to improve security at
the border,
because, as I said, it's a lot
more expensive
not to enforce the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very quick, 10
seconds on the
wall.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: This is
political theatrics,
Judy.
Mexico was never going to pay
for this wall.
We as taxpayers are now stuck
with that bill.
Everything that has been
announced by President
Trump is extreme, it's
expensive, and ineffective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we are
going to continue
to it look at this.
We know more will be unfolding
in the days
to come on the question of
immigration.
Marielena Hincapie, Jessica
Vaughan, thank
you.
MARIELENA HINCAPIE: Thank you.
JESSICA VAUGHAN: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Turning now to
another initiative
from the president, this one
about the integrity
of our elections.
Mr. Trump has again repeated the
unproven
claim that millions of illegal
votes were
cast in the last election, and
now he says
he will order a federal
investigation to look
into it.
William Brangham has that story.
DONALD TRUMP (R), President of
the United
States: We're in a rigged
system, folks.
We're in a rigged system.
They even want to try to rig the
election
at the polling booths.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He made it a
rallying cry
during his presidential
campaign.
Now, having won the White House,
President
Trump is raising the issue yet
again.
On Twitter today, he announced:
"I will be
asking for a major investigation
into voter
fraud.
Depending on results, we will
strengthen up
voting procedures."
This follows his remarks to
congressional
leaders on Monday, where, in a
closed-door
meeting, the president repeated
his claim
that Hillary Clinton won the
popular vote
only because of three to five
million illegal
votes being cast for her.
In fact, there is no evidence of
widespread
voter fraud in the presidential
election last
fall.
And what's more, previous
studies have found
no such evidence going back to
2000.
Top Republicans, including House
Speaker Paul
Ryan, underscored that point
yesterday.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the
House: I
have seen no evidence to that
effect.
And I have made that very, very
clear.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: South Carolina
Republican
Lindsey Graham went further,
telling the president
to knock it off.
SEN.
LINDSEY GRAHAM (R), South
Carolina: If the
president of the United States
is claiming
that 3 to 3.5 million people
voted illegally,
that shakes confidence in our
democracy.
He needs to disclose why he
believes that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still, the
president persists,
as his White House spokesman,
Sean Spicer,
acknowledged on Tuesday.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
He continues to maintain that
belief.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And President
Trump's pick
for attorney general, Senator
Jeff Sessions,
said at his confirmation hearing
this month
that he believes -- quote -- "We
regularly
have fraudulent activities occur
during election
cycles."
Today, White House spokesman
Spicer said the
investigation that the president
wants is
about the integrity of the
system.
SEAN SPICER: There's a lot of
people that
are dead that are on rolls.
There are people that are voting
in tow places
or that are on the rolls in two
different
states.
I think taking the necessary
steps to study
and to track what we can do to
understand
is something that is definitely,
clearly in
the best interests.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Senator Bernie
Sanders and
leading Democrats fired back
that the president
is actually -- quote -- "telling
Republicans
to accelerate voter suppression"
with stricter
voter I.D. laws.
Spicer acknowledged today that
expanding controversial
voter I.D. laws could be one
outcome of the
investigation.
For more on the president's
unproven allegations
and his call for an
investigation, I'm joined
now by Rick Hasen.
He's a law professor at the
University of
California, Irvine, and writes
the Election
Law Blog, and by Alex Padilla,
who is California's
secretary of state.
He's a Democrat, and he oversees
elections
there.
Gentlemen, welcome to you both.
Rick Hasen, I would like to
start with you.
The allegation on the table is
that three
or four or five million people
voted illegally
in this last election.
Is there any evidence that that
went on?
RICK HASEN, University of
California, Irvine:
There's no evidence that that
went on.
There is no evidence even that
thousands or
even hundreds of illegal votes
were cast.
And, you know, think about five
million people
involved in a conspiracy that no
one has been
able to detect, even in those
states with
Republican secretaries of state
that are looking
out for this kind of fraud that
is supposedly
happening.
It is just a ludicrous idea.
And if you were going do this
and engage in
this vast conspiracy, you would
think that
you would be able to actually
swing the results
of the election and put maybe
10,000 or 20,000
more votes in Michigan and in
Pennsylvania.
It just -- it is a ludicrous
accusation.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Secretary of
State Padilla,
the same question to you.
You oversaw an election in the
biggest state
in the country.
How much election fraud did you
see in your
state?
ALEX PADILLA, California
Secretary of State:
Look, I can honestly tell that
you we have
zero evidence of any
non-citizens voting in
the November election here in
the state of
California.
We take voter fraud very
seriously and invite
anybody that has information
about irregularities
or wrongdoing to bring it
forward.
And we're happy to look into it.
I extended that offer to team
Trump back in
November.
And that offer still stands.
But, like Rick mentioned,
there's zero evidence
of this happening.
Here's what my bigger concern
is.
And I think the more that
President Trump
and the administration calls
into question
the integrity of the elections,
they're simply
setting the stage for proposed
changes to
policy and changes to law that
will follow
that will take our country
backwards as it
pertains to voting rights.
And we need to push back every
step of the
way.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Mr. Padilla,
though, staying
with you, a lot of conservatives
will argue
that if you don't need to have
an I.D. to
prove you are who you say you
are when you
go to vote, couldn't there be
widespread voter
fraud, and you just wouldn't
know about it?
ALEX PADILLA: There's a lot of
hypotheticals
that people would like to kind
of put out
there to create the concern, to
create the
doubt.
But the fact of the matter is,
voter fraud
isn't something that we just
started paying
attention to in this November
election.
It is a question that comes up
in each and
every election cycle.
And there has been study after
study, report
after report, investigation
after investigation
in a variety of sectors that all
conclude
the same thing.
Voter fraud may be very, very
isolated, but
at the end of the day, it is
nearly nonexistent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rick, a
question for you.
Sean Spicer today tried to
seemingly dial
down the accusations that Donald
Trump had
made.
And he said that the
investigation, if it
goes forward, will look at
things like dead
people on the voter rolls or
people being
registered in two different
states.
Interestingly today, it turned
out that the
president's daughter, his
commerce secretary
pick and his counselor Steve
Bannon were themselves
all registered to vote in two
different states.
But those things happening, dead
people on
voter rolls or registering in
two states,
is that evidence of fraud?
RICK HASEN: Well, there is
occasional fraud.
But almost all of these
accusations of dead
people voting turn out to be
either bureaucratic
incompetence or voter error.
So, a few years ago, there was a
sensationalized
statement in North Carolina that
there were
tons of dead people voting.
And when they actually
investigated, they
found that not one of those
involved voter
fraud.
Mostly what they involved was
either a mistake
where, say, a senior was
confused for a junior,
or a voter signed on the wrong
line in the
poll book.
And there is a lot of dead wood.
There are a lot of people who
move from one
state to another.
That may be what is happening
with some of
the people in the Trump
administration.
And their old registration is
not canceled.
But we have very little evidence
of people
engaging in -- certainly in
impersonation
fraud, which you mentioned
earlier, double
voting, very rare.
The kind of fraud that does
happen, when it
does happen, tends to be
absentee ballot fraud.
And that is the one kind of
fraud I have not
heard Donald Trump mentioning
anything about
trying to cut down on.
If we really cared about fraud,
that would
be number one on the list.
And it's not even on the list,
apparently.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Secretary
Padilla, we often
see, after there are accusations
of voter
fraud, very soon thereafter,
there are attempts
to crack down and to pass
stiffer voting I.D.
laws.
Do you expect to see that in the
wake of this
investigation?
ALEX PADILLA: That's frankly my
biggest fear
here.
You know, we have heard the
allegations starting
in November about rampant voter
fraud with
not a shred of evidence or proof
to back it
up.
Now we are hearing not just
those allegations
yet again, but now a call for a
major investigation,
to use his words, an
investigation based on
allegations that are not based
in reality
or in any evidence whatsoever.
That's where we are today.
And like I said, if this is
simply setting
the tone for going backwards on
voting rights
in America, that is something
that we ought
to be concerned about and be
prepared to push
back on, because we have seen
the playbook.
Look what has happened in state
after state
after state across the country,
overly aggressive
purging of voter rolls, very
creatively written
voter I.D. laws, the elimination
or significant
reduction of early voting
opportunities, making
it harder for American citizens
to be registered
to vote and to actually cast a
ballot.
That's unpatriotic, in my
opinion, un-American
and undemocratic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Rick Hasen,
let's say this
investigation that is being
called for by
the Trump administration goes
forward.
Could it be a good thing?
If so, how would you like it to
unfold?
RICK HASEN: Well, I think if we
had an investigation
into the extent to which there
is voter fraud
and suppression, and we had it
with bipartisan,
well-respected people in charge,
as we had
in 200, when we had Presidents
Carter and
Ford, or in 2004, when we had
President Carter
and James Baker, or in 2008,
when we had Ben
Ginsberg and Bob Bauer, two
Republican and
Democratic election lawyers, if
we had professionals,
we had election administrators
all involved,
and we looked at the whole
picture, do these
laws suppress more votes than
prevent -- than
the amount of fraud they
prevent, I think
that would be a great thing.
I just don't think that that is
what Donald
Trump's administration is going
to set up.
And so I don't have a lot of
confidence that
the investigation would be a
full, fair investigation
on a bipartisan basis that
really looks at
evidence to get to the truth.
ALEX PADILLA: And I would offer
two things,
if I may.
Short term, if the president
really was interested
about the integrity of the
November election
that just took place, he ought
to pick up
that intelligence briefing.
The intelligence community is
unanimous in
their findings that there was
foreign interference
with our elections this
November.
The president ought to
acknowledge that and
he should act on that.
Longer term, if the Trump
administration really
wants to be helpful and the
Republican Congress
really wants to be helpful,
there would be
another round of election
funding.
The last time there was
significant investment
into how we conduct elections
came in the
wake of Florida in 2000.
Congress acted on a bipartisan
basis, put
moneys out to the state for the
upgrade of
our voting systems.
But those systems are now more
than a decade
old.
And as the Brennan Center and
other bipartisan
commissions have told us, that
is probably
the ticking time bomb threat to
our elections.
We need to invest in new
equipment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Alex Padilla,
the secretary of state of
California, and
Rick Hasen, U.C.
Irvine, thank you both very
much.
ALEX PADILLA: Thanks.
RICK HASEN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
using psychedelic
drugs to treat illness; and
remembering Mary
Tyler Moore.
But, first, one other story that
has been
getting much attention about
these first few
days of the Trump
administration, are government
agencies being silenced from
their normal
way of communicating with the
public?
And is this administration going
further than
its predecessors?
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Reports continued
today from
several news outlets that the
Trump administration
has tried to limit the flow of
information
from key government agencies,
many involved
in environmental and scientific
research.
Among them, according to The
Washington Post,
Associated Press and others, the
Environmental
Protection Agency, where staff
are reportedly
banned from sending press
releases or posting
to the agency's social media
accounts.
Similar orders were allegedly
issued within
the Departments of Interior and
Agriculture.
Officials from the USDA later
told reporters
the order was improperly issued
and not cleared
by senior leadership.
Meanwhile, at the White House
today, Press
Secretary Sean Spicer disputed
the broader
claims altogether.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary:
No, no, there's nothing that's
come from the
White House.
JEFFREY BROWN: In a separate
interview with
NPR, however, a spokesman for
the Trump transition
team at the EPA did say agency
scientists
will likely have their research
reviewed on
a case-by-case basis before
being released
publicly.
Juliet Eilperin has been looking
into these
developments for The Washington
Post.
She joins us now.
So, Juliet, a certain amount of
confusion
at this point.
How much do we know about
whether the administration
is attempting to silence these
agencies?
JULIET EILPERIN, The Washington
Post: Well,
there are certainly -- there are
some agencies
where there have been clear
efforts by new
members of the administration
who are restricting
the communication.
Now, other administrations have
also sought
to get everyone on the same
page.
They seem -- these new
administration officials
seem to be going further, and,
in some cases,
they're quite restrictive.
So, just it kind of depends on a
case-by-case
basis, but there is no question
that there
is a clampdown on direct
communication with
the public in some of these
agencies.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, before
I ask you
for an example, but go back to
that comparison.
There is always a normal
changeover, right?
And so does this look more like
a temporary
pause in these agencies, or is
this on a different
scale?
JULIET EILPERIN: It certainly
seems to be
more severe in terms of some
individual agencies.
And also, because of advances in
technology,
they're simply more forms of
communication.
There weren't, you know, tons of
Twitter accounts
back when the Obama
administration took over.
So, you know, it is certainly
being done in
a visible way.
And it is affecting more
platforms, and that
is something that is different.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, so
take an example.
A lot of focus, of course, on
the EPA, for
example, restricting social
media, when papers
can be published.
Some talk now about whether
there is a review
of the Web site, specifically
about the climate
change information there.
What do we know so far?
JULIET EILPERIN: At that agency,
it's very
clear that you have officials
who are restricting
the level of communication, both
in terms
of, again, these social media
accounts, press
releases, other kinds of
communication, as
well as the fact that they are
indicating
on the record that they will
regulate kind
of what communications
scientists can have
with the public in certain
instances.
So that is something that is
significant.
Now, in terms its of the Web
site, which is
something we have been looking
very carefully
into, the EPA has many Web pages
devoted to
climate, sharing data, things
like that.
There was an effort to explore
taking it down,
and career staff there resisted.
And, as a result, they are now
not going to
do that.
But that did happen.
But there was this effort, but
then it was
reversed later on.
JEFFREY BROWN: You heard Sean
Spicer say today
it is not a White House effort.
Where would it be coming from,
if not from
there?
Could it be the agencies
themselves sort of
taking proactive steps?
JULIET EILPERIN: It seems like
it's a combination
of new appointees in some of
these agencies
and to some extent career
officials responding
to what they think are messages
they might
have gotten from the
administration more broadly.
Sean Spicer, as you noted and as
you explained,
is on the record saying they are
not directing
this.
But there is no question that
this is something
that certainly has transpired
since President
Trump has taken office.
JEFFREY BROWN: And to go from
the EPA to some
other agencies, a common thread
or some of
the focus clearly is on
scientific data, specifically
around climate change, correct?
JULIET EILPERIN: Right, that is
something
that certainly surfaced at USDA,
although,
again, they reversed themselves
over time.
What is interesting about the
Interior Department
is they are restricting a huge
amount of communication,
including with, say, tribes,
which potentially
can raise questions of
sovereignty.
So, it is not just a question of
a tweet,
which is kind of one of the
things Sean Spicer
was talking about.
It is really about, how are you
communicating,
whether it's your research or
your policies,
to the broader public?
JEFFREY BROWN: And are you able
to talk to
people inside these agencies?
What kind of concerns are you
hearing?
JULIET EILPERIN: Many of the
career officials
are quite scared right now.
There is no question.
Now, I think we will see how
this plays out.
Again, there are -- there have
been these
tensions early on in previous
administrations.
And so what we are looking for
are what are
the decisions past this initial
flurry of
activity that will really set
the ground rules
for, to what extent can federal
officials
share what they know and what
they are finding
out with the public, whether
it's through
the media or directly?
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Juliet
Eilperin
of The Washington Post, thank
you very much.
JULIET EILPERIN: Thanks so much,
Jeff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
Congress.
Republican members of the House
and Senate
are in Philadelphia today for
their annual
retreat.
They are trying to outline an
ambitious agenda
to accomplish in the next 200
days, and setting
the tone for how they will work
with President
Trump and his administration.
Our Lisa Desjardins has been
there.
Lisa, first off, we led off
tonight's program
with the announcements by the
president today
having to do with cracking down
on illegal
immigration.
Of course, one big element of
that is the
border wall.
We know members of Congress,
especially the
Republicans, are looking at how
to pay for
that.
Have they come up with an
answer?
LISA DESJARDINS: There is some
news.
This is not definitive yet, but
a plan seems
to be emerging, Judy.
House Speaker Paul Ryan told
gathered Republicans
today that they should consider
possibly a
supplemental spending bill.
That would be a separate
spending bill devoted
just to homeland security and
maybe some military
spending.
Now, a caveat here, that request
needs to
still come from the president.
But this looks like the
mechanism.
The questions about that bill
are, of course,
what is in it, probably a border
wall, probably
all of those new border and
customs agents
that the president wants.
We don't have a price tag yet,
also no clear
way how they would pay for it.
But the idea seems to be to get
that spending
bill off the ground and maybe
pass within
the next two months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, Lisa, you
have been reminding
us, Republicans in Congress
tackling a number
of complicated issues, what to
do about them,
taxes, health care.
They have been divided among
themselves over
what to do.
Now that they are getting closer
to the nitty-gritty,
working out the details, are
they coming any
closer together to agreement?
LISA DESJARDINS: I spoke to so
many Republicans
today, Judy.
And there is certainly a will,
but the way
is not clear yet on many of
these issues.
There is still major divide over
big things
like Medicaid and also over some
clear just
issues of process.
How many bills does it take to
accomplish
all of this?
How long does it take to do it?
There is one thing, though that
seems to be
at least on the tracks, a
deadline for when
the actual final repeal bill
will move through
Congress.
The House says they want their
bill all the
way done and voted on in the
next month.
That is just the repeal, not the
replace,
but that would be a major step.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally Lisa,
we know the
president is making news on a
number of fronts
today, issuing executive orders
on a variety
of things.
He's been tweeting.
He's been doing interviews.
And one of the things that came
out late this
afternoon in an interview he did
with ABC
News has to do with his belief,
he is stating
his belief again that enhanced
interrogation,
which is one way of saying
torture, he believes,
can be effective with terror
suspects.
On some of these -- are things
like this and
other executive actions and
statements by
the president, what effect are
they having
on these conversations among
Republicans?
LISA DESJARDINS: Absolutely.
Look at the program we have had
tonight.
All of the issues that you have
brought up
tonight have landed on
Republicans' laps coming
from the White House in this
retreat.
This is not what they wanted to
talk about,
but they have been talking about
it.
And on torture, there is some
divide among
Republicans.
For example, I asked Senator
John Thune.
He said that that is a decided
issue, that
torture is unlawful.
But others, like new
Congresswoman Liz Cheney,
daughter of Dick Cheney, said
she thinks it's
not that simple.
So there is some divide on that.
That is what Republicans have
been asked about
today.
It's not what they really wanted
to talk about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fascinating, Lisa
Desjardins,
on top of it all in
Philadelphia.
Thank you, Lisa.
Now: why some psychiatrists and
researchers
are giving psychedelic drugs a
second look
as a possible way of treating
depression and
some mental illnesses.
The idea had been shunned for
years, but now
some say a time for larger
trials with the
drugs is due.
Miles O'Brien has the story for
our weekly
segment on the Leading Edge of
science.
SGT.
C.J. HARDIN (RET.), U.S. Army
Veteran: I was
diagnosed with post-traumatic
stress disorder
in Fort Campbell.
MILES O'BRIEN: C.j.
Hardin is a former Army
helicopter mechanic
and machine gunner who faced
imminent death
in Iraq, and also after he got
home.
C.J. HARDIN: The way that my
emotions ran,
and how it felt uncontrollable,
I didn't trust
myself having a weapon around
me, because
I was suicidal, very suicidal at
that point.
MILES O'BRIEN: Years of pills
and talk therapy
failed to help his
post-traumatic stress disorder.
So, he turned to a surprising
alternative
at the center of a revolution in
neuroscience
and medicine.
DR.
MICHAEL MITHOEFER, Therapist:
So, this is
the MDMA that we use for the
current study.
MILES O'BRIEN: Hardin took MDMA,
more commonly
known as Ecstasy, under the
watchful eyes
of therapists Michael and Annie
Mithoefer,
a husband-and-wife team based in
Charleston,
South Carolina.
DR.
MICHAEL MITHOEFER: This is where
we do the
MDMA sessions.
We don't know how this works,
but we have
ideas about it.
MILES O'BRIEN: In one study of
19 subjects,
more than 80 percent reported
significant
improvement, after carefully
guided sessions
like this.
SGT.
C.J. HARDIN: Which I knew was
the PTSD.
I was never feeling comfortable
at home.
I was still lucid, but it just
felt like I
had opened up a new avenue of
thinking.
MILES O'BRIEN: C.J. Hardin says
the difference
for him was like night and day.
SGT.
C.J. HARDIN: I had three
experiences at full
dosage, but the effects after
the first treatment
were profound.
I would have said a 60 percent
reduction in
my symptoms immediately.
I felt a mighty change had
occurred.
MILES O'BRIEN: The fact that
these studies
are happening at all represents
a mighty change
in the scientific community, a
renaissance
in thinking about psychedelic
drugs like MDMA,
LSD and psilocybin, the drug
found in magic
mushrooms.
STEPHEN ROSS, NYU Langone
Medical Center:
Psychiatrists are really
yearning to have
something that works
differently, that works
quickly, that lasts longer to
add to their
toolbox.
It's really important to do
that.
MILES O'BRIEN: Stephen Ross is a
psychiatrist
and addiction specialist at NYU
Langone Medical
Center.
He is exploring the medical uses
of psilocybin,
a close cousin of LSD.
He says the drugs are safe, but
only in a
carefully controlled setting.
Can you overdose?
STEPHEN ROSS: There are no known
overdoses
with psilocybin.
It's not known to have a toxic
dose.
It's considered safe
physiologically.
But, psychologically, that's
where the potential
damage and danger is.
And that's why these drugs, in
uncontrolled
settings, can create anxiety,
they can create
paranoia, they can create
dangerous behavior.
MILES O'BRIEN: Skeptics say the
studies are
relatively small, and it's
extremely difficult
to compare these drugs with a
placebo.
Concerns notwithstanding,
researchers across
the nation are tuning in and
turning on to
psychedelics a few generations
after psychologist
Timothy Leary unintentionally
stigmatized
them.
In the 1960s, Leary conducted a
series of
valid experiments with LSD and
psilocybin,
but as he devolved into an
infamous psychedelic
poster boy, the drugs escaped
the lab.
MAN: The natural state of the
brain is chaos.
MILES O'BRIEN: In 1970, the
federal government
made the drugs illegal, in the
same category
as heroin.
The mainstream medical community
tapped out,
even though there was a lot of
data suggesting
the drugs might help people with
certain mental
illnesses.
STEPHEN ROSS: I was fascinated
that, how could
this have been such a big part
of a psychiatry
and that I never heard about it,
completely
buried in my training?
And that just made me really
curious to look
further into it.
MILES O'BRIEN: Much remains a
mystery, but
advanced neuroimaging has
provided some new
clues.
Psilocybin seems to quiet brain
areas known
as the default mode network,
essentially our
autopilot mode.
And this might help break the
chains of addiction,
or lift the fog of depression.
STEPHEN ROSS: So it's plausible
that sort
of deactivating that network can
take someone
away from a stuck pathologic
rhythm into something
else.
MILES O'BRIEN: The Mithoefers
are working
on a similar hypothesis as they
study MDMA
and its effects on PTSD.
They too suspect the drug helps
break a cycle.
DR.
MICHAEL MITHOEFER: We know that
people with
PTSD have increased activity in
the amygdala,
the fear center, and they have
decreased activity
in the prefrontal cortex.
MILES O'BRIEN: The amygdala is
at the center
of our brain.
It is what creates our emotional
reactions,
pleasant and unpleasant,
including sadness,
anxiety and fear.
The prefrontal cortex, our
executive brain,
is where we temper those
emotions through
rational decision-making.
MDMA decreases activity in the
amygdala and
increases activity in the
prefrontal cortex.
So it tamps down the negative
emotions in
the first place and also
increases the brain's
ability to keep those feelings
in check.
Researchers aren't sure whether
the drug works
by causing direct changes in
brain chemistry,
or simply by making trauma
easier to talk
about and process.
DR.
MICHAEL MITHOEFER: What we see
in the sessions
is that it seems to kind of
bring people down
from being overwhelmed by
emotions, but also
kind of bring them up from being
numbed out
or disconnected from emotions.
That's when the therapeutic
change happens.
MILES O'BRIEN: With both drugs,
doctors use
a similar approach.
Dr. Ross showed me the room
where he and his
team conduct therapy Sessions
for subjects
under the influence of
psilocybin.
STEPHEN ROSS: We walk over to
them, give them
the pill, some water, they take
it, and then
they will essentially sit here
for about half-an-hour.
We will turn the music on, the
pre-selected
music, give them some art books,
or they will
meditate a little bit.
And then after, about
half-an-hour, when they're
feeling something, we will
instruct them into
the default position.
Lie down on your back, eye
shades, music.
And the two therapists sit here
for many hours.
MILES O'BRIEN: In December, Ross
and colleagues
published a paper on the impact
of psilocybin
for people with severe anxiety
or depression
due to a grave illness.
They found that a single dose of
psilocybin
reliably helped 60 percent to 80
percent of
them feel better immediately,
and for as long
as six months.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins
reported similar
results.
ESTALYN WALCOFF,
Psychotherapist: My name
is Estalyn Walcoff and I work as
a psychotherapist.
MILES O'BRIEN: Estalyn Walcoff
was a subject
in the NYU study.
ESTALYN WALCOFF: It was as if
this spirit
that I had hoped to connect to
was so much
bigger and stronger than I had
ever imagined.
I was quaking in my boots.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ross and
Mithoefer say it's
important to temper the
enthusiasm.
DR.
MICHAEL MITHOEFER: This seems to
be a very
powerful tool, but it is only a
tool.
And it's the person's own
healing process
and their relationships, the
therapeutic relationships,
that support that that are very
important.
I think there is the danger of
people thinking
of it as a magic bullet.
STEPHEN ROSS: We're following
the data.
We don't think that this is
going to cure
anything or change the world.
We are focused on helping sick
people and
just doing more science and
following the
data, seeing where it leads.
MILES O'BRIEN: Both drugs may
soon be put
to a bigger test.
Researchers are asking the
government to approve
some major trials, with hundreds
of subjects,
some time this year.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," New York.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
remembering
a TV legend, Mary Tyler Moore.
And back to Jeffrey Brown, who
has our remembrance.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was sitcom
television that
signaled and helped push larger
cultural change,
"The Mary Tyler Moore Show" in
the 1970s,
in which the actress played a
single, 30-something
working woman, Mary Richards, a
TV producer
at a local Minneapolis station,
here with
her boss, played by Ed Asner.
ED ASNER, Actor: You know what?
You have got spunk.
(LAUGHTER)
MARY TYLER MOORE, Actress:
Well...
ED ASNER: I hate spunk.
(LAUGHTER)
ED ASNER: I'll tell you what.
I will try you out for a couple
of weeks and
see how it works out.
If I don't like you, I will fire
you.
MARY TYLER MOORE: Right, right.
ED ASNER: If you don't like me,
I will fire
you.
(LAUGHTER)
MARY TYLER MOORE: That certainly
seems fair.
I will get a towel from the
kitchen.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the '60s,
Moore had been
a beloved figure in a more
traditional role
for women, as the frazzled, but
often hilarious
wife of Dick Van Dyke on the
show bearing
his name.
MARY TYLER MOORE: Snow White
lived.
(LAUGHTER)
DICK VAN DYKE, Actor: Oh, what a
day.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Over the years,
she won seven
Emmy Awards for her television
roles, and
an Oscar-nominated performance
in the 1980
film "Ordinary People," the
story of a disintegrating
family following a son's death.
Moore wrote and spoke of her own
struggles,
a battle with alcoholism, and
with the diabetes
she lived with for some 40
years.
She was also a champion for
animal rights.
Mary Tyler Moore was 80 years
old.
A short time ago, I spoke with
Dick Cavett.
He interviewed Mary Tyler Moore
a number of
times over the years, and was a
good friend.
I began by asking about her
talent as a comic
actor.
Dick Cavett, thanks so much for
joining us.
First, Mary Tyler Moore, the
comic performer,
what did she have?
DICK CAVETT, Entertainer: She
had it all.
She had everything.
And she had more than many comic
performers.
We had that period of so many
wonderful what
used to be called comediennes,
Lucy and Carol
and Mary.
Mary was extremely beautiful.
And that doesn't necessarily go
up to that
period of time with comediennes.
They were either scrawny or had
bad hair or
looked funny.
And to be a beauty and to be a
comedienne,
witty, and even, when required,
slapstick,
Mary had it all.
Once, a writer on the show said,
Mary is the
only person I have ever worked
with who made
every script better.
And I said, be specific.
And he said, all can I say is,
when we gave
Mary the script, we found laughs
in straight
lines that we didn't know were
there.
Mary had the greatest laugh, the
gutsiest,
almost really bawdy laugh that
you rarely
saw her do on television, a
great sense of
humor.
Though we didn't have the term
glass ceilings,
she in fact came through one,
and made it
better for a lot of other women
in television
by showing that she was somebody
who was -- a
woman could pull, pull the
audience in a very
big way.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Dick
Cavett, thank
you very much for joining us.
And for some more perspective on
Mary Tyler
Moore's influence, I'm joined
now by Cynthia
Littleton of "Variety."
She has written about Moore and
is the author
of two books about television.
You know, Cynthia, it's almost
hard to think
back to TV in those days, the
kinds of subjects
that were not discussed, the way
women were
not portrayed, or the way they
were portrayed.
In what ways did Mary Tyler
Moore and that
show change things?
CYNTHIA LITTLETON, "Variety":
Well, as you
said, the image of a strong,
independent woman
over 30 who wasn't necessarily
hunting for
a husband, but wanted to build a
career, that
was pretty revolutionary for
September of
1970, when the show premiered.
And when you think about what
was going on
in the country, you have the
stirrings of
the second wave of the modern
women's movement.
It really was quite a
confluence.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, what are
examples of some
things that she helped bring to
the fore in
the culture, in popular
entertainment?
CYNTHIA LITTLETON: I think the
show very famously
made references to her taking
birth control
bills, made references to her
spending the
night with dates, made a very
early reference
to a character, a guest star
character being
gay as almost a matter-of-fact
aside.
And those were -- those were
things done in
a show that didn't necessarily
wear its social
consciousness on its sleeve, not
as much as
"All in the Family," but in
reflecting the
state of the culture as it stood
in the early
'70s, just had profound impact.
JEFFREY BROWN: And much of this,
of course,
through the very specific
persona of Mary
Tyler Moore herself, right?
CYNTHIA LITTLETON: Mary
Richards, and I think
there was a continuum to the
character she
played on "The Dick Van Dyke
Show."
Laura Petrie was not a mousy
sitcom wife,
but very independent, very, very
smart.
She famously wore capri pants
around the house.
She -- Laura Petrie was also --
I think Mary
Tyler Moore's career truly was a
continuum
of role models right -- that
were right for
the era.
JEFFREY BROWN: And, very
briefly, I mean,
obviously, there was impact in
spinoffs from
that program, but do you see the
impact and
legacy today in performers and
shows?
CYNTHIA LITTLETON: So many
workplace comedies
are always held up against the
standard that
"The Mary Tyler Moore Show" set.
JEFFREY BROWN: Such as?
CYNTHIA LITTLETON: You know,
current shows
that try to have a workplace
setting, like,
you know, so many shows over the
years.
That ensemble of characters, it
was just a
murderers row of Betty White,
Cloris Leachman,
Valerie Harper, Ed Asner.
It really does still set the
standard.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
Cynthia Littleton
of "Variety," thank you very
much.
CYNTHIA LITTLETON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online right
now: Researchers predict that
the average
monthly water bill will rise by
nearly $50
over the next five years.
That means that for one-third of
Americans,
water could become unaffordable.
You can see which communities
are most at
risk.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on PBS, Twin
Cities PBS presents
a film about one of the most
critical health
crises to face the country.
"Alzheimer's: Every Minute
Counts" illuminates
the mounting emotional and
financial costs
associated with caring for those
afflicted
by the disease and it provides a
powerful
wakeup call that underscores the
pressing
need to come up with viable
solutions, and
quickly.
"Alzheimer's: Every Minute
Counts," it airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.